The Joe Rogan experience.
There's a guy who I hope someday we'll get to be on your show named Alec
Karakatsanis. Who's the author of a book called usual cruelty,
which is like my Bible now.
And it is its usual cruelty by how like LEC,
uh Karakatsanis he's got an organization called civil rights Corps and he's been
suing cities and counties all over the country to eliminate cash bail because
cash bail is at the root of a lot of these problems.
So mommy bale has existed since,
you know, it was a ballad since bail was invented,
whatever the hell it was a long time ago, but bill historically. Yeah,
it was an unsecured. Uh, um, it was an unsecured bond,
right. Which meant that they,
they figured out they wanted to charge people if they didn't show up for trial.
Right. So, but that,
what that meant is if you were arrested and you were supposed to show up in
court, if you didn't show up, they would send you a bill. Right?
And then in 1899, it changed.
And people realize it actually started in San Francisco strangely enough,
which is now actually leading the charge in the other direction. But in 1899,
they decided to start charging people upfront.
So you had to post bail money to be free until your
trial. Now,
this obviously affected one group of people, poor people, right? Because,
and you know, we always see mugshots of celebrities, right?
When they're arrested and they're smiling, right? Because they,
their lawyer's waiting outside to take them to a lobster dinner or whatever the
hell they're going to go do. Um, and what,
what happened is that soon enough,
and Alec taught me a lot of this stuff. Soon enough,
it became clear that this could be an incredible profit center, right?
That charging people for their own freedom. It's a billion.
You can't afford not to pay, but if you can't afford to pay it, you go to jail.
So then emerged this bail bonds industry, right.
Which is now a multi-billion dollar industry and how that works is if you're
poor and you can't afford to post bail for yourself,
someone will come along and say, if you give me 10% of the money,
non-refundable whether you're innocent, guilty,
whether your charges are dropped in an hour, it doesn't matter.
You give me that money. I keep it. I post the rest,
which usually they don't even do. It's just an understanding that. Yeah. Yeah.
And you can go home. Now, if you don't do that, think about the consequences,
right? So you're picked up for anything. Shoplifting could be mistaken.
Identity could be any crime at all, or any minor thing.
Misdemeanors would make up a huge percentage of the jail population.
Most commonly it's just driving on a suspended license.
That's the most common cause of arrest. I think in most places in America,
driving on a suspended license, and they're going to put you in a jail cell,
they're going to deprive you of contact with your family of your ability,
to work of your ability, to take a walk of your ability to avoid, uh,
violence that may occur to you when you're in that cell, um,
of all different types. And you're very like,
your very life will be at risk. And so if you don't,
if you don't have the money to, to avoid that,
you're now going to be subjected to being in jail.
We have about 450,000 people in jail in America right
now, as we're sitting here, we don't know if there did anything or not.
They haven't been tried. 80% of people in jail have never had a trial yet.
And they could sit there for a week, a month, a year,
several years awaiting trial.
And that's why most of them will plead guilty within about 3.2 days is the
average time. But someone will plead guilty if they're in jail.
Whereas if they're out and think about this too, right? If you're out,
you don't plead guilty. You wait and you have your day in court.
And it also deprives you of the ability to defend yourself, right?
So let's say you're accused of attacking somebody, right. And beating somebody,
whatever it, whatever it might be. Right.
And you're in jail because you can't post bail. You can't meet with your lawyer.
They don't have time to come visit you in jail.
You can't get them on the phone readily.
You can't take your lawyer to the scene of the crime to show that it couldn't,
you couldn't have been there because, or whatever,
or the witness couldn't have seen you because the lights or whatever it is,
you have no ability to Mount an effective defense. If you're in jail,
which is why 96, 90 7% of hopeful. Now I'm just talking felonies.
But 96% of felonies, uh, conviction,
this country are a result of guilty pleas because people realize they can't
fight it.
And they can't afford to sit in jail because they could lose their job.
They could lose their home. They could lose their family if they don't,
if they don't either, either put up the money, which they don't have or, um,
or plead guilty. So this is, this is a problem that is being addressed.
Like I said,
Alec one has been winning lawsuits all over the country because it's a violation
of the sixth and the 14th amendment. You can't call it equal protection.
If two different people are charged with the exact same thing,
but the one with money goes home. And the one without money goes to jail.
That is such a beautiful way to put it. And so,
so clear because I've been seeing people talk about, uh,
different Progressive's that want to get rid of cash bail and how ridiculous
that is and what you're saying makes total sense.
And I've never seen it laid out like that before.
And I didn't know that there were that many people that are in jail for things,
and they can't post bail because they don't have the money.
And so they just have to wait for trial.
And what percentage of them did you say, what percentage of them are, uh, what,
what percentage of people that get arrested? Can't post bail?
I don't actually know that percentage, but I think it's,
it's very high because most people don't have, I mean, look,
most Americans don't have more than $400 in free cash.
This works. If you ever want to be, if you ever really want to, um,
see the inequities here and see how the system is so up,
go sit, you could do it at nothing, obviously not now, but when,
when the world resumed,
so some sense of normalcy go to any criminal court and watch the arraignments.
All right. And if you watch the arraignments,
you will see they parade in all of the arrestees of the last
24 hours and they read their charges
and they will then set bail. They will make a decision on bail. You'll,
you'll notice two or three things.
One you'll notice that the vast majority of people in any,
um, certainly in any urban, um,
jurisdiction in any big city or people of color.
And I sat recently watching this happen in Tampa, Florida,
cause I was working on the James daily case and they did arraignments before my
hearing. And I sat with a bunch of public defenders and I listened to them.
Wince. Every time someone of color young person of color was brought in,
um, driving on a suspended license, possession of marijuana,
possession of hydrocodone without a prescription.
And they set their bail a thousand, 10,007,000.
And they would say, well that person's going to re get out or they say,
if you don't, we're going to let you out.
But if you don't pay a fine of $1,500 within 60 days,
you're back in or he'll be back in, I'll be representing him again.
And you watch as Jason put it this churn machine
and you watch how these people of color are
treated very differently from white defendants.
And you, you can just assess based on the fact that the judge will say,
do you currently have a job? No. Where are you living? Well, I don't know.
I'm going to stay on someone's couch and you start to quickly be able to do the
computation in your mind where they coming up with a thousand dollars or $500,
and then they will re-offend and end up right back where they were.
And what will really be striking to you is that I would,
I would venture to say in the high eighties, in terms of percentage,
these people, what they really need is help with an addiction.
And if we put a third of the money that we spend incarcerating people,
keeping them incarcerated on drug and alcohol
rehabilitation, the incarceration rate would plummet.
And the recidivism rate, you know,
people re-offending would plummet and not only we don't have to
hypothesize that's in fact, what happens. It happens in countries that,
you know,
decriminalized drugs and it happens in countries where there's not such an
emphasis on jailing people.
And there's more of an emphasis on getting them help.
And to answer your question,
do I just looked it up because this is I'm going to quote from the book usual
cruelty again by Alec Karakatsanis,
between 80 and 90% of the people charged with crimes are poor.
That they cannot afford a lawyer, 25 years into American incarceration. Boom,
black people were incarcerated at a rate six times out of South Africa during
apartheid, the incarceration rate for black people in the nation's capital,
where I live is 19 times that of white people. And it's,
it still goes on every day. And the, the net benefit, this is, well,
there is no net benefit to society. In fact,
it's been proven the university of Pennsylvania,
the Quattrone center did a study that showed that people,
they studied people who were jailed or freed for the exact same crime under the
exact same circumstances, right?
And this one posted bail and that one couldn't and they found that the people
who went to jail, even if it, for as little,
as a few days were 40% more likely to be arrested for another
felony in suing year.
So because their lives fall apart while they're in jail. And then, you know,
like I said, they lose their job.
You can't just not show up for work for a few days and be like I was in jail,
you know? So, you know, and if I could,
I'm just going to read the first paragraph of the book because this really,
I think puts it in stark contrast, tell people what the book is. Again,
the book is called usual cruelty by Alec Karakatsanis,
which is K a R a K a T S a N I S. It's kind of a tongue twister.
And so the book starts off on January 26th, 2014,
Chanel Mitchell was sitting on her couch with her one-year-old daughter on her
lap and her four-year-old son DARS side,
armed government agents entered her home, put her in metal restraints,
took her from her children and brought her to the Montgomery county,
Montgomery city, jail, jail staff. Sorry,
I turned the page jail staff told Sharnell that she owed the city money for old
traffic tickets.
The city had privatized the collection of her debts to a for-profit probation
company, which had sought a warrant for her arrest.
I happened to be sitting in the courtroom on the morning that Chanel was brought
to court along with dozens of other people who had been jailed because they owed
the city money. The judge demanded that Chanel pay or stay in jail.
If she could not pay, she would be kept in a cage until she quotes,
sat out her debts at $50 per day or $75 per day.
If she agreed to clean the courthouse,
bathrooms and the feces blood and mucus from the jail walls.
An hour later in a windowless cell Chanel told me that a jail guard had given
her a pencil.
And she showed me that crumpled court document on the back of which she had
calculated how many more weeks of forced labor separated her from her
children that day. She became my first client as a civil rights lawyer.
So, you know, that's, that's really it. You know,
we have this mythology in America that the people in jails are bad people.
A lot of them are there just because they're poor.
There's no other reason that Chanel Mitchell or all these other people are there
except they couldn't pay their traffic tickets. And what do you, you know,
we talked about single parents, right? What do you do? You're a single parent.
You have a choice between feeding your kids or paying a traffic ticket or
whatever it might be. These are not bad people.
And the idea that we send, uh,
like more or less like a team to the home of this woman to pull her away from
her kids, what kind of planet is it? Is there where that's okay.
But it's, it happens in darkness, right? It doesn't,
we don't see that right now.
There's all this awareness being brought to George Floyd and the rest of this
stuff, which is really important.
And I'm so glad that it's coming to light and people are starting to, you know,
really rise up as one, right? As, as one group, as humans,
not as black people or white people or, or any other kinds of people,
but together,
but this stuff happens under it under the shade of darkness where we don't see
it. We don't see what happens in the jails and prisons,
but what happens there in Harris county where Alec won this suit recently,
and now this did a wonderful piece on this,
but about 20 people a year die in the Harris county
jail awaiting trial, right. They're either murdered or something.
Sandra bland died in that jail. Right? Yeah. And, um, you know,
w we have to just stop. I mean, this is,
this is it, it it's, it's unconscionable to me. We have,
we have 7 million people under the control of the criminal justice system.
Right. We have more black people incarcerated right now,
or under control of the system than we ever had enslaved in any time in
us history.
Jesus Christ. What is that? It's crazy.
And the amount of human potential that's lost. It, it boggles my mind.
There's probably another Lennox Lewis that could have been right.
There's another Jay Z in there somewhere.
I asked me mil when he was on my podcast, wrongful conviction. I said,
how many guys did you meet in jail? Who could have been another you?
And he said, I can't even tell you. He goes,
there's so many talented people in there that just, you know, circumstance.
Yeah.